chore: add blog post about building images with bake (#314)
cloudnative-pg/cloudnative-pg.github.io: content/blog/building-images-bake/index.md

---
title: "Creating a custom container image for CloudNativePG v2.0"
date: 2025-06-17
draft: false
image:
    url: 
    attribution: 
author: jgonzalez
tags:
 - blog
 - information
 - programming
 - applications
 - containers
 - postgresql
 - postgres
 - images
 - tutorial
summary: Creating a container image for CloudNativePG Operator v2.0
---

## Summary
In an almost [two years old blog post]({{% ref "/blog/creating-container-images/" %}}), we explained how
to build a custom container image for CloudNativePG. After two years, many things have changed in the world of containers.

> One of those things was the introduction of [Bake](https://www.docker.com/blog/bake/) in Docker, which allows you to build

Author: Fixed

### Step 2: Build the image

We can now build the image using the following command:

```bash
docker buildx bake -f docker-bake.hcl -f cwd://bake.hcl "https://github.com/cloudnative-pg/postgres-containers.git" myimage
```
This will, by default, build the image for the bake matrix we previously created, and will try to push the image to the registry at
`localhost:5000`, which is the default registry defined for testing environments in the parent bake file. Let's explain the full command first.

As is defined in the [Bake documentation about remote definitions](https://docs.docker.com/build/bake/remote-definition/)
you can use a remote bake definition with all the functions and default targets, and attach another local one that you can use to override
all the default values.
In the command above, `-f cwd://bake.hcl` is the local file that we created in the previous step, and
`-f docker-bake.hcl` is the remote file that we're using to build the image, which is in the git repo.

You can explore more about all the content generated and used inside the bake file by appending the `--print` flag, as in the following command:

```bash

> docker buildx bake -f docker-bake.hcl -f cwd://bake.hcl "https://github.com/cloudnative-pg/postgres-containers.git" myimage --print

Author: That issue is handled here https://github.com/cloudnative-pg/postgres-containers/blob/main/BUILD.md#verifying-requirements

> docker buildx bake -f docker-bake.hcl -f cwd://bake.hcl "https://github.com/cloudnative-pg/postgres-containers.git" myimage --print

Author: Can you test that solution? that's because of the builder and probably a mismatch versions

> docker buildx bake -f docker-bake.hcl -f cwd://bake.hcl "https://github.com/cloudnative-pg/postgres-containers.git" myimage --print

Reviewer: what's the output from 
`docker buildx ls`
there should be a "docker-container" DRIVER/ENDPOINT

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/04bb6d01-aa6a-4f51-b3cb-fe08171b0cda)

https://docs.docker.com/build/builders/drivers/
https://docs.docker.com/build/builders/drivers/docker-container/

if the default* is docker as seen in the screenshot, you need to add `--builder=container` to `docker buildx bake ...`

> docker buildx bake -f docker-bake.hcl -f cwd://bake.hcl "https://github.com/cloudnative-pg/postgres-containers.git" myimage --print

Reviewer 2: Okay that worked! It's late here, I'll have a look at the rest of the steps tomorrow. Thank you!

```

### Step 3: Push the image to a registry

Now you just need to push the image to a registry, you can do this by using the following command:

```bash
registry=your/registry:5000 docker buildx bake -f docker-bake.hcl -f cwd://bake.hcl "https://github.com/cloudnative-pg/postgres-containers.git" myimage --push
```

The previous command will push the images in the following format: `your/registry:5000/postgresql-testing:17-standard-bookworm`.
Using the `--print` flag you can explore the full list of tags created that are in the parent bake file.

### Step 4: Serve the image

You can now let your clusters use the image that we've built based on the CloudNativePG operand images provided
by the CloudNativePG project.

## Deep dive into the Bake and Dockerfile

The simplicity of Bake to do even more stuff is amazing, and allows you to create custom images in a very simple way.
But, how does this magic happen? Let's take a look at the Bake and the Docker file.

### Bake file

This is the base of our magic, but that magic starts in our postgres-containers repository, where we have a `docker-bake.hcl` file

> that is being used to build the images provided by the CloudNativePG project, and it's the base for our custom Bake file.

Author: Fixed

---
title: "Creating a custom container image for CloudNativePG v2.0"
date: 2025-06-17
draft: false
image:
    url: 
    attribution: 
author: jgonzalez
tags:
 - blog
 - information
 - programming
 - applications
 - containers
 - postgresql
 - postgres
 - images
 - tutorial
summary: Creating a container image for CloudNativePG Operator v2.0
---

## Summary
In an almost [two years old blog post]({{% ref "/blog/creating-container-images/" %}}), we explained how
to build a custom container image for CloudNativePG. After two years, many things have changed in the world of containers.

> One of those things has been the introduction of [Bake](https://docs.docker.com/build/) in Docker, which allows you to build

Reviewer 3: That's the generic build doc. Shouldn't we point to the specific bake one?
```suggestion
One of those things has been the introduction of [Bake](https://docs.docker.com/build/bake/) in Docker, which allows you to build
```

images using a simple configuration file. Bake is now our recommended way to build images for CloudNativePG.

> We will follow a simple cooking recipe to create a custom container image or a set of container images, since Bake

Reviewer 3: I think "cooking recipe" is a bit overkill in English. In Spanish, this is how you'd say it, but in English, recipe is enough.
Unless you were being playful, in which case you might consider "baking recipe".

---
title: "Creating a custom container image for CloudNativePG v2.0"
date: 2025-06-17
draft: false
image:
    url: 
    attribution: 
author: jgonzalez
tags:
 - blog
 - information
 - programming
 - applications
 - containers
 - postgresql
 - postgres
 - images
 - tutorial
 - bake
 - docker
summary: Creating a container image for CloudNativePG Operator v2.0
---

## Summary

> In an almost [two years old blog post]({{% ref "/blog/creating-container-images/" %}}), we explained how
> to build a custom container image for CloudNativePG. After two years, many things have changed in the world of containers.

Reviewer 3: OK, this is just very clunky wording. Adding a suggestion.
```suggestion
Almost two years ago, we wrote a [blog post on
building custom container images for CloudNativePG]({{% ref "/blog/creating-container-images/" %}}).
Since then, many things have changed in the world of containers.
```

One of those things has been the introduction of [Bake](https://docs.docker.com/build/bake/) in Docker, which allows you to build
images using a simple configuration file. Bake is now our recommended way to build images for CloudNativePG.

> We will follow a simple baking recipe to create a custom container image or a set of container images, since Bake
> allows you to build multiple images at once in a simple way.

Reviewer 3: Also clunky. Suggestion:
```suggestion
We will follow a simple baking recipe to create a custom container image.
Bake will also allow you to easily build multiple images at the same time.
```

## Ingredients

- A Bake file. We will use the one provided in the [CloudNativePG repository](https://github.com/cloudnative-pg/postgres-containers/blob/main/docker-bake.hcl)

> - Another Bake file, but this time a local one, this one is to overwrite the previous one.

Reviewer 3: To overwrite the previous one? Then why have the other one?
I imagine the second bake file allows you to override specific variables?
Also "but this time" is useless.
You have a base Bake file, and a second Bake file to customize specific settings. No "this time".

Baking time: 5 minutes.

## Instructions

### Step 1: Prepare local Bake file

> In a local file with name [bake.hcl](bake.hcl), we add the following content, which is a simple Bake file that will build a custom image

Reviewer 3: "In a local file we add content which is a file."
Please rewrite that.

```hcl
extensions = [
  "pgvector",
]
target "myimage" {
  dockerfile-inline = <<EOT
ARG BASEIMAGE="ghcr.io/cloudnative-pg/postgresql:16.9-standard-bookworm"
FROM $BASEIMAGE AS myimage
ARG EXTENSIONS
USER root
RUN apt-get update && \
    apt-get install -y --no-install-recommends $EXTENSIONS && \
    apt-get purge -y --auto-remove -o APT::AutoRemove::RecommendsImportant=false && \
    rm -rf /var/lib/apt/lists/* /var/cache/* /var/log/*
USER 26
EOT

  matrix = {
    tgt = [
      "myimage"
    ]
    pgVersion = [
      "16.9",
      "17.5",
    ]
  }
  name = "postgresql-${index(split(".",cleanVersion(pgVersion)),0)}-standard-bookworm"
  target = "${tgt}"
  args = {
    BASE_IMAGE = "ghcr.io/cloudnative-pg/postgresql:${cleanVersion(pgVersion)}-standard-bookworm",
    EXTENSIONS = "${getExtensionsString(pgVersion, extensions)}",
  }
}
```

There are a few things that we should remark here:

> - The `extensions` variable is a list of extensions that we want to include in the image. In our recipe we are using `pg_vector`,

Reviewer 3: OK, in our recipe we include `pgvector`, not `pg_vector` in that file. So you may want to clarify.

>   but you can add any other extension that you want to include in the image.

Reviewer 3: add what you want to include ... redundant.
```suggestion
  but you can add any other extension you want.
```

- The `dockerfile-inline` variable contains our Dockerfile definition, which cannot be used remotely. We will explain more about this later.

> - The `target` and the `tgt` have the same name, you can use whatever you want here as a name

Reviewer 3: First of all, if you want to start the second clause with "you". Please add a period, not a comma.
Or, you can rephrase so the second clause is not as abrupt.

- The `pgVersion` variable is a list that contains basically the MAJOR.MINOR version of PostgreSQL
- The `name` is the name that we will use later to refer to one element of the matrix that we created
- The variable `args` lists all the arguments passed to the Dockerfile. We will talk more about this later.
- The function `getExtensionsString()` is inherited from the Bake file that we reference in the [Ingredients](#ingredients) section

### Step 2: Build the image

We can now build the image using the following command:

```bash
docker buildx bake -f docker-bake.hcl -f cwd://bake.hcl "https://github.com/cloudnative-pg/postgres-containers.git" myimage
```

This will, by default, build the image for the bake matrix we previously created, and will try to push the image to the registry at
`localhost:5000`, which is the default registry defined for testing environments in the parent Bake file. Let's explain the full command:

> As is defined in the [Bake documentation about remote definitions](https://docs.docker.com/build/bake/remote-definition/)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As explained in the [Bake documentation about remote definitions](https://docs.docker.com/build/bake/remote-definition/)
```

> you can use a remote Bake definition with all the functions and default targets, and attach another local one that you can use to override
> all the default values.

Reviewer 3: First of all, this is a bit redundant, so I have a suggestion.
Second: if you override ALL the default values, why even have a base file?
```suggestion
you can use a remote Bake definition with all the functions and default targets, and attach another local one to override
all the default values.
```

In the command above, `-f cwd://bake.hcl` is the local file that we created in Step 1, and
`-f docker-bake.hcl` is the remote file in the git repo, that we're using to build the image.

You can explore more about all the content generated and used inside the Bake file by appending the `--print` flag, as in the following command:

```bash
docker buildx bake -f docker-bake.hcl -f cwd://bake.hcl "https://github.com/cloudnative-pg/postgres-containers.git" myimage --print
```

### Step 3: Push the image to a registry

Now you just need to push the image to a registry. You can do this by using the following command:

```bash
registry=your/registry:5000 docker buildx bake -f docker-bake.hcl -f cwd://bake.hcl "https://github.com/cloudnative-pg/postgres-containers.git" myimage --push
```

The previous command will push the images in the following format: `your/registry:5000/postgresql-testing:17-standard-bookworm`.
Using the `--print` flag you can explore the full list of tags created that are in the parent Bake file.

### Step 4: Serve the image

> You can now let your clusters use the image that we've built based on the CloudNativePG operand images provided
> by the CloudNativePG project.

Reviewer 3: Redundant, and two very close mentions of CloudNativePG.
```suggestion
You can now let your clusters use the image that we've built based on the CloudNativePG operand images.
```

## Deep dive into the Bake and Dockerfile

> The simplicity of Bake to do even more stuff is amazing, and allows you to create custom images easily.

Reviewer 3: This is almost meaningless.
```suggestion
The simplicity of Bake to do even more stuff is amazing, and allows you to create custom images easily.
```

But, how does this magic happen? Let's take a look at the Bake and the Docker file.

### Bake file

The magic starts with our [postgres-containers repository](https://github.com/cloudnative-pg/postgres-containers),
where we have a `docker-bake.hcl` file that is being used to build the images provided by the CloudNativePG project.
It's the base for our custom Bake file.

The `docker-bake.hcl` file contains a lot of functions that are used to build the images. One of them is the `getExtensionsString()`.
This function, given the list of extensions we provided, will return a string of the extensions with the correct package name
for a Debian-based distribution, in our case, Debian Bookworm.

> For example, the `pg_vector` extension will be translated into

Reviewer 3: As noted before: in the file we call it `pgvector`, so we need either consistency or an explanation of the difference.

`postgresql-16-pgvector,` which is the name of the package for pgvector extensions for PostgreSQL 16 in the Debian
Bookworm distribution.

When we add elements to, for example, the `args` variable, those elements are processed by the Bake file, and will be

> merged, meaning that the new elements will be added, and the existing ones will be overwritten.

Reviewer 3: "processed by the Bake file"??
Or processed by the Docker bake command?

And, do we need to explain what merge means?
"meaning that the new elements will be added, and the existing ones will be overwritten."

### Dockerfile file

The Dockerfile is simply a heredoc string, because of the limitations of Bake to overwrite the remote Dockerfile with a
local one, but it allows us to change the FROM in the image, which means we can create an image that it's directly based

> on the CloudNativePG images, and we can add the extensions we want to use in our image, without building all of them.

Reviewer 3: I really don't understand this.
Also "an image that it's directly based on the CloudNaivePG images" is not grammatical. I think you may mean "an image that is ...", not "it's", but it's hard for me to understand the intent.

for a Debian-based distribution, in our case, Debian Bookworm.
For example, the `pgvector` extension will be translated into
`postgresql-16-pgvector,` which is the name of the package for pgvector extensions for PostgreSQL 16 in the Debian
Bookworm distribution.

When we add elements to, for example, the `args` variable, those elements are processed by the Docker bake command, and will be
merged, meaning that the new elements will be added, and the existing ones will be overwritten.

### Dockerfile file

The Dockerfile is defined as a heredoc string due to Bake's limitation in overriding a remote Dockerfile with a local
one. However, this approach still lets us modify the FROM directive, allowing us to base our image directly on the
CloudNativePG images and add only the specific extensions we need—without rebuilding all of them.

## Making your images for specific architectures

By default, we build the images for `amd64` and `arm64` architectures, which is the recommended approach for most users.
However, if you want to build images for your specific architecture and so, saving some space, you can override the
`platforms` variable in your local Bake file.

> 

Reviewer 4: By default, images are built for both `amd64` and `arm64` architectures, which is the recommended setup for most users. However, if you want to target a specific architecture and reduce image size, you can override the `platforms` variable in your local Bake file.
